Project Scope – Netball Australia pathways project
Background
Netball is a team sport that is played by over 300,000 people across all corners of Australia.
In Australia it is the number 1 chosen sport for women and girls to participate in. Netball is
undergoing a growth phase with many netballers in the last 3 years being able to become
fully professional. However, there is competition from other sports such as the football
codes and cricket in the domestic market for players, sponsorship and broadcast minutes as
well as internationally from other netball competitions such as the English Super League.
Australia currently is seen to have the best domestic competition in the World luring the
best players from over the World to compete for teams in the Suncorp Super Netball (SSN)
competition. The International Netball Federation (INF) sanction competitions of national
representative teams and hold two major competitions being the Netball World Cup (NWC)
and the Commonwealth Games (CG). Australia’s national team, the Australian Diamonds, is
currently ranked number 1 in the World and finished silver medalists at the most recent
WNC and CG.
Problem
Netball Australia are interested in making progress on three problems as follows:
1. Netball Australia currently has a selection policy for the Australia Diamonds which
considers the performances in the SSN as a ‘yard stick’ to understand the current
form of the Australian athletes eligible for selection to the Australian Diamonds.
What level of confidence can we have in the performance in the domestic
competitions (Australia and New Zealand) to indicate the performance of those
players at international tournaments?
2. In 2017 Australia split from a joint domestic league shared with New Zealand (ANZ
Championship) to form it’s own domestic competition the SSN (New Zealand’s stand
alone compeititon is called the ANZ Premiership). In 2017 the SSN relaxed restictions
on teams having players from outside of their clubs competiting nation. This change
has some people suggesting this has been determintal to the Australian Diamonds
performance. What has the performance consequence been for the Australian
Diamonds since the split of the ANZ Championship into separate SSN and ANZ
Premiership competitions?
3. Traditionally netball coaches would wait until the quarter time breaks to make any
changes to the playing positions of players during a match. There have been rules
governing the ‘interchanging’ of players reserving it for an injury called by the
players on the court, which have been exploited by coaches for many years.
Therefore, the SSN competition are introducing a rule change to allow for teams to
freely interchange as they see fit. Are there any typical patterns or signals that
indicate a coach is going to make a change to their on court players?